
Timeline of the Half-Life universe
Contributors to Half-Life Wiki
39–49 minutes

This article contains spoilers. Read at your own risk!
	This article is within the scope of the Portal Project, a collaborative effort to improve articles related to Portal and Portal 2. See the project page for more details about the article status.
Gordon rubble crowbar

Gordon Freeman in City 17 rubble in 202-.

    "Time, Dr. Freeman? Is it really that time again? It seems as if you only just arrived."
    ―The G-Man[src]

A timeline of the Half-Life and Portal universe can be made by gathering known dates. Since several retcons have been made since the release of the first game and technological limitations have changed in the intervening time, a complete official Half-Life series timeline will probably never be made, especially due to the fact it could probably make the writers contradict themselves and limit their creativity for possible subsequent episodes.[1] Despite this, general events can be organized in a chronological order around known dates.
1940s[]
1943[]

    Cave Johnson receives the Shower Curtain Salesman award within Aperture Fixtures.

1944[]
January[]

    Cave Johnson appears in the UP Pioneer Press headlines for buying a salt mine in Upper Michigan, which is later reconstructed as the Aperture Science Innovators facility.

Between 1944 and 1954[]

    Richard Keller is born.[2]

1947[]

    Aperture Science receives the award for Best New Science Company from the Science and Business Institute of America.

Between 1947 and 1957[]

    Wallace Breen is born. [3]

1949[]

    Aperture Science is rated #2 among the Top 100 Applied Science Companies by the Mechanical Engineering World Journal.

1950s[]

It is during this decade that the Black Mesa facilities are probably built, before being purchased and refurbished later by Black Mesa (several Half-Life texture files names contain the word "fifties", suggesting the facility is as old as from the 1950s).
1952[]

    Aperture Science is the Runner Up for the US Department of Defense's Contractor of the Year award. By now, Aperture Science has begun testing Repulsion Gel.

1953[]

    Aperture Science constructs Pump Station Alpha and at least Test Shaft 09 Chambers 01 and 02.
    In this year, Aperture discovers quantum tunneling portal technology, and begins development on it. Side note: Aperture Portals are NOT wormholes.[4] Aperture installs very low level portals in their still being sold shower curtains, between the inside and outside of your shower. Apparently, "Very little science" is needed to make portal technology work.

1954[]

    Aperture Science is the Runner Up for the US Department of Defense's Contractor of the Year award again.

1955[]

    Aperture Science receives the Spirit of Idaho National Potato Board award for the promotion of Potato Science.

1956[]

    The Eisenhower administration signs a contract with Aperture Science to manufacture shower curtains to all branches of the US Military, except the Navy.[5]
    Pump Station Alpha (which pumps Repulsion Gel) is in active use by now.

1957[]

    Aperture Science constructs at least Test Shaft 09 Chamber 26.

1958[]

    Aperture Science constructs Test Shaft 09 Chambers 27 and 28.

1960s[]
1961[]
June 15[]

    Aperture Science's Test Shaft 09 "Zulu Bunsen" is condemned and sealed off.

1968[]

    Aperture Science is involved in US Senate hearings regarding "missing astronauts". By now, Aperture Science has gone black bankrupt. Cave Johnson says that Black Mesa has stolen and remade many of Aperture's products.

Moon 2

The Apollo 16 landing site
Between 1968 and 1978[]

    Colette Green is born. [6]

1969[]

    Apollo 11 lands on the Moon.

1970s[]

Sometime in the late 1970s, Aperture Science Innovators somehow manages to figure out time travel, yet never uses it.[7]
1971[]

    Aperture Science re-opens Test Shaft 09 for testing. The lower sections appear to remain unused.
    Aperture constructs Pump Station Beta and begins Propulsion Gel testing.

1972[]

    Aperture Science constructs at least Chambers 01 and 02 of the Propulsion Gel Testing Facility.

1973[]

    This date is the earliest known use of a bulletin board system by Aperture Science.[8]

Between 1974 and 1984[]

    Gina Cross is born. [9]

c. 1976[]

    Gordon Freeman is born.

1976[]

    Aperture Science constructs Chamber 05 of the Propulsion Gel Testing Facility.

October 17[]

    Cave Johnson receives the answer to a confidential letter titled "Human Enrichment & Testing Initiative, Resource Acquisitions", describing the four types of Test Subjects and their behavior.[8]

1978[]

    Aperture Science constructs the elevator out of the Propulsion Gel Testing Facility.

1979[]

    Both of Cave Johnson's kidney's fail due to an unspecified reason. Dying and in his deteriorating decrepit state, he concocts 2 ideas, the Aperture Science Reverse-Heimlich Maneuver, designed to make people choke to death, and the Aperture Science Take-A-Wish Foundation, taking wishes from terminally ill children to random but well-off adults.

Between 1977 and 1987[]
Adrian Shephard

Adrian Shephard.

    Adrian Shephard is born.

1980s[]
1981[]

    Aperture Science constructs the Conversion Gel Testing Facility's enrichment center, and now performs tests on its own employees. By now, Cave Johnson has spent $70 million on moon rocks to grind up and turn into Conversion Gel, and as a result of exposure has himself become gravely ill and addicted to pain medication.
    The 2 previously mentioned projects, the Aperture Science Reverse-Heimlich Maneuver, and the Aperture Science Take-A-Wish Foundation, are released to the public in a lavish ceremony. To the surprise of no one, the products instantly become extremely unpopular and lead to hundreds of deaths and disasters. Aperture is called by the US Government due to this to a supposedly secret meeting, at which they reveal their secret "Portal" project, and the Government signs a long contract with Aperture, giving them more funding, Apparently several high ranking Fatah members die due to the Reverse-Heimlich maneuver.[10]
    Aperture Science would've hit bankruptcy if it was not for the contract.

1982[]

    Aperture Science constructs Pump Station Gamma and the Conversion Gel Testing Facility.
    Cave Johnson names Caroline as his successor when he realizes he will die. When testing is complete, her intelligence is to be stored in a computer, only if Cave dies before it's completed. A couple years after this announcement, he succumbs to moon rock poisoning and dies.

1983[]
The girls of aperture science

September page of "The girls of Aperture Science" 1983 calendar, with a girl posing in bikini on an Unstationary Scaffold in test chamber 18, as seen in one of Ratman's dens.

    For this year, a calendar named "The girls of Aperture Science" is issued by Aperture Science. It is unknown if it was issued each year.[11]

1985[]

    The Aperture Image Format is created.[8]

1986[]

    The Conversion Gel Testing Facility is updated with an additional wall.
    Word reaches Aperture Science management that Black Mesa is working on a similar portal technology. In response to this news, Aperture Science actually begins developing GLaDOS, although the name was already in use in 1982, they weren't developing it until 1986.[5]

1987[]

    This is the most recent date for the Aperture Image Format. At that time, it is maintained by Doug Rattmann.[8]

    Sometime in this time period, Cave Johnson dies of moon-rock poisoning. It is unspecified when exactly it happened.
    The Borealis is claimed lost at sea. It is also unspecified when exactly this occurred.

1990s[]

    Judging from Chell's handwriting and spelling skills,[12] she is very young, meaning that the Aperture Science Bring Your Daughter to Work Day event occurs sometime early or mid in this decade, and ends in the GLaDOS disaster.[13][14]
    An unspecified time in the late 90's after 1996, likely 1998, Caroline is brain mapped and forcefully put into GLaDOS and activated without her consent. Mere picoseconds later, she develops a hatred for the scientists and an urge to kill. Luckily this does not amount to anything and leads to Aperture Science developing Aperture Science Personality Constructs, attaching many onto GLaDOS in an attempt to stop her from attempting to take control, which succeeds until May 14, 200-. A certain Intelligence Dampening Core is attached and removed in this process.[15]

Between 1990 and 2009[]

    Alyx Vance is born.

1996[]

    GLaDOS V.1 is activated, which is just the DOS part at this point, and works as planned, an AI computer assistant. Due to the DOS part of GLaDOS being completed, they begin development on the GL part, mapping Caroline's brain. The Aperture Science Red Phone plan is implemented in case GLaDOS appears to go crazy or become godlike, requiring an employee to sit by a red phone on a desk in GLaDOS chamber's entrance hall.[16]

1997[]

    At this time, GLaDOS's version is 3.11. This is also the latest known date of Aperture Science using a bulletin board system.[8]

1998[]

    Aperture Science releases several testing elements, such as the Excursion Funnel, a tractor beam-like funnel made of liquid asbestos, the Thermal Discouragement Beam, a laser to be used with a Weighted Pivot Cube to destroy Sentry Guns and activate some buttons, the Aerial Faith Plate, a catapult plate flinging into the air Test Subjects or any other object upon contact, and the Pneumatic Diversity Vent, a variant of the Vital Apparatus Vent used for distributing objects to Test Chambers.[17][18][19]
    This year is presumably when GLaDOS is first activated after Caroline's brain-mapping. GLaDOS immediately attempts to kill personel, but is stopped with Personality Cores.

2000s[]

    On an unknown time before bring-your-cat-to-work-day, Chell applies to work on Aperture Science as a test subject, but is rejected.[20]

200-[]
Rtb laidlaw note

Marc Laidlaw's brainstorm note from Raising the Bar.
Blue Marble calendar 2

The December calendar.

    This is the "year" during which the Black Mesa Incident occurs. Deliberately kept vague by the Half-Life team,[21] it could be any date from 2000 to 2009.

Deduction initially pointed at "May 16, 200-" for the precise date of the incident. It may, however, have been retconned; for ease of viewing, the article will use that date exclusively. What follows are the different facts and clues leading to that initial choice:

    The year "200-", first appearing in the Half-Life instruction manual, is given in every official source from the Half-Life story arc era.

    In Half-Life 2, Dr. Breen implies that Gordon had been working for a short time, but the Episodes describe various stories involving him and Barney that would not be realistic for a short tenure. This likely suggests May 16th is not the date, as the date of his entrance is not implied to be changed.
    Several entries from Adrian Shephard's diary are given in the Opposing Force instruction manual, written by Gearbox writers. March is used, corroborating the Raising the Bar date. Shephard says in his last diary entry, written on March 15, "We were told today to be ready in case it happens tomorrow.", suggesting that the incident occurs on March 16. It seems that the Gearbox writers replaced March with May: in the Half-Life instruction manual, Freeman is said to start working at Black Mesa on May 15, he is also said in the Half-Life PlayStation 2 instruction manual to attend the Hazard Course on May 16 at 7:30 (in a Hazard Course schedule with dates all set in May), and Barney is said to start his duty on May 16 at 9:00. Therefore, May 16 was the best day for the incident pre-retcon (see above point), and consequently March from Shephard's diary would have been replaced by May, based on the contents of the diary. An exception, however, has to be given with, at least, his first two journals, to maintain continuity.
        Furthermore, the hazard course in the PS2 version has a section mentioning numerous sensor errors, implying the hazard course was to occur the same day as the disaster.

    While "200-" could refer to any date from 2000 to 2009, a note by series' writer Marc Laidlaw seen in Raising the Bar features "March 31, 2003", and a time, "4:33 p.m.".[22] Although it has not been confirmed by Valve, it is possible that the Half-Life events originally were to start on March 31, 2003.

    A calendar with the "Blue Marble" photo is also seen in the Half-Life chapter Office Complex, in the Opposing Force chapter Welcome to Black Mesa, in the Blue Shift chapters Insecurity and Captive Freight and in the Decay chapter Domestic Violence, always using the same texture file showing the December page. While the table was not made with much precision, December 1, 8, and 15th start on a Sunday, suggesting the calendar is for the year 2002. However, there should be no reason every visible calendar should be opened to several months after the current date of May 16. One possible explanation for why these calendars are opened to December is that the Black Mesa Incident occurred after 2002, and that the calendars that are seen are actually several months out date, either due to Black Mesa not purchasing new calendars or simply the forgetfulness of staff members.

    Considering that the lack of accurate calendars (as hypothesized in the previous paragraph) likely could not be overlooked for more than a year or two at most, it is quite probable that the Black Mesa incident occurred in 2003. This concurs with Laidlaw's notes, indicating that the most likely date and time of the Black Mesa Incident would be Friday, May 16, 2003, at 8:58 AM UTC-07:00. However, since Valve has not confirmed this date on top of a possible retcon, one should hesitate before treating this time as absolute.

    On March 24, 2010, an updated and expanded Aperture Science timeline, originally given on ApertureScience.com in 2006 and submitted by Erik Wolpaw, was published on Game Informer.[23] Several dates were changed, and the last paragraph was expanded with facts suggesting that the Black Mesa Incident had occurred in 1998, the same date as that of Half-Life's release, instead of the original "200-". However Marc Laidlaw dismissed "1998" as the date for the Black Mesa Incident, as the date "200-" given when the first Half-Life was released is the only correct one.[21] It is unknown why Erik Wolpaw made that mistake, and if it was intended or not. For convenience and consistency, that "1998" will always be replaced by "200-" on the wiki, even with the dates pertaining to Aperture Science.

March 3[]

    From Shephard's diary entries: "Another typically hellish day at base camp... I'll be glad when this is over and I can finally can get assigned a mission. There has been this really weird civie spotted at the base. Rumor is he's from some government branch looking to recruit; others say he's with some secret research group. I would jump at the chance to join. It would be cool just for the change and the adventure."[24]
        This could not take place in May, as the weeks on end training later on could not work if boot camp didn't even start.

March 7[]

    From Shephard's diary entries: "I finally saw the government guy today. I am not sure he is a g-man, but he was wearing a really uptight suit and carrying a briefcase. He looked more like a lawyer or insurance agent to me. I did notice him checking me out. Several times throughout the day I spotted him just watching me during training. I wonder what he's up to..."[24]
        Again, it has to stay in March, because the boot camp hasn't started yet.

Between March 7 and March 14[]

    Adrian Shepard is "mysteriously" bumped up to the advanced training list. This is also the point in time when G-man visits the Marine Boot Camp. This is the Opposing Force Boot Camp tutorial.[25]
        Because this seems to introduce things exclusive to the H.E.C.U, it's reasonable to infer this is after the second journal.

May 5[]
Gordon letter PS2

Freeman's letter of acceptance to Black Mesa, as it appears in the instruction manual of the PlayStation 2 version of Half-Life.

    The original date that Gordon Freeman receives a letter from the Black Mesa Office of the Administrator's LM confirming he is hired.[26] It has now been retconned to an earlier date.[27]

May 9[]

    From Shephard's diary entries (originally March; see above): "For weeks our drills have been the same crap day after day. Today we assemble for the morning run and our drill instructor tells us we have one week to become experts at indoor strategic combat. We will be spending every day this week at the combat simulation facility. As far as I know this a specialized training not taught in boot camp. What I want to know is if this is to test our ability to adapt or if we are being readied for a specific mission? Time will tell..."[24]
        This is probably a while after boot camp, because it would make little sense for the week deadline if the incident was 2 months after.

    Barney Calhoun receives a letter from L.M. about his May 15 reassignment to Blue Shift.[28]

May 11[]

    Colette Green receives a letter from the Black Mesa Office of the Administrator's LM saying that sample GG-3883 will replace sample EP-0021.[26]

Before May 12[]

    Barney Calhoun is performing a retinal scan and has his salary increased. His two-day Security Guard Training is scheduled.[28]

May 12[]

    From Shephard's diary entries (originally March; see above): "The rumors have been flying since our indoor combat training began. Most of my peers are convinced that we are being primed for a mission. No one can agree on what the mission is. I have heard the name Black Mesa Facility thrown around a lot, but I have no information about the place. The rumors are that some top-secret research is going on there. Doesn't sound too exciting to me..."[24]

08:00[]

    First day of Barney Calhoun's Security Guard Training under Miller's Holographic Instructor counterpart, in Sector A Training Facility. This is the Blue Shift Hazard Course.[26][29]

May 13[]

    Second day of Barney Calhoun's Security Guard Training.[29]

10:30[]
Decay notes

Colette Green's letter about sample GG-3883 and Gina Cross' Hazard Course Training schedule.

    Walter Bennet is being instructed by Gina Cross for an Anti-Mass Spectrometer Overload Simulation.[26]

May 14[]

    (The date for this is unknown, this is a placeholder) GLaDOS fools the researchers into thinking she is good, and asks to do an "Experiment" requiring neurotoxin as a part of Bring-Your-Cat-To-Work-day. The Scientists, believing no ill will, accept and give her neurotoxin, and upon being given it, within picoseconds she takes control of Aperture Laboratories, locks everyone inside, and kills the Enrichment Center staff via neurotoxin if they refuse to opt in to her new testing initiative. Most staff either die from testing or being killed by GLaDOS due to their non-compliance. Some survive, one of them being Doug Rattmann.[30] She begins testing in a desperate attempt to out-do Black Mesa, still hunting down remaining staff.

19:00[]

    Colette Green was to be instructed by Isaac Kleiner for an Anomalous Materials Handling, but it was postponed to June.[26]

May 15[]

    Barney Calhoun is assigned to a 09:00 - 22:00 Blue Shift assignment until August 15 and reports at Area 3 Medium Security Facilities at 09:00. Other unknown security guards are assigned to Red, Orange, Yellow, Green and Indigo Shifts in specific areas of Sector A, B, and C. For that timespan, the Violet Shift is on standby.[28]

    From Shephard's diary entries (originally March; see above): "The rumor has been confirmed. We are being trained for a mission at the Black Mesa Facility. All I know is that the place is being used by scientists who are doing some kind of new research. I can't imagine what we would be needed for. We were told today to be ready in case it happens tomorrow. I don't know what "it" is, but the whole thing is a little strange. I kind of hope it doesn't happen; the mission doesn't seem to have much excitement potential. I'd rather hold out for something with more likelihood of combat."[24]

    This day is Gordon Freeman's first day of work at Black Mesa,[26]

20:30[]

    Gina Cross is being instructed by Richard Keller for a Mark V HEV Suit Prototype Testing.[26]

May 15[]

May 16[]

    This was likely supposed to be the original date of the incident, before the implication of a retcon as in Half-Life 2 and its episodes, where it is implied that Gordon was already working for some time at Black Mesa before the incident: Barney tells Gordon he owes him a beer and reminds him who he is when first meeting in the City 17 Trainstation, and Alyx tells in the City 17 Underground that Gordon and Barney would compete in air ducts to get into Kleiner's office whenever he got himself locked out, among others.

07:30[]

    This is the date for Gordon Freeman's HEV Suit Training in Sector A. This is the Half-Life Hazard Course.[27]

First Day of the Incident[]
08:30[]

    Several system crashes occur around Black Mesa (the security guard in the Sector C lobby states he has had a system crash "about 20 minutes ago").[27]

8:42[]

    Barney Calhoun starts his tram ride from the Area 8 Topside Dormitories at Black Mesa,[29] to start his second day at Area 3 Medium Security Facilities in Sector C.[28] He arrives there as soon as Gordon Freeman begins his tram ride, at 8:47.

8:47[]

    Gordon Freeman starts his tram ride from Level 3 Dormitories at Black Mesa. He is 30 minutes late.[27]

8:58[]

    The Black Mesa Incident. Freeman conducts an experiment on sample GG-3883 in Sector C's Anti-Mass Spectrometer. The experiment goes wrong and triggers a Resonance Cascade, teleporting Xen creatures to Earth.[27]
    Test chamber

    The Anti-Mass Spectrometer.

Remainder of the day[]

    Freeman, Calhoun, Green and Cross fight their way through the facility.
    Adrian Shephard and his squad are shot down by an Alien Aircraft and their Osprey crashes.
    Overnight, Freeman successfully launches the rocket.

19:00[]

    As heard during the tram ride at the start of Half-Life, the Black Mesa Hazard Course Decathlon was to start in the Level 3 facility.[27] This never happened due to the incident.

Second Day of the Incident[]

    Early in the morning, Gina Cross and Colette Green are able to perform a resonance reversal. Colette's fate, along with Keller's, are unknown. Gina possibly perishes some time during the incident[31]
    Barney Calhoun successfully escapes Black Mesa with Rosenberg, Simmons and Walter Bennet.
    Gordon Freeman fights his way across the surface towards the Lambda Complex.
    Shephard is left behind (this matches the message addressed to Cooper)
    Race X creatures appear sometime after Shepherd witnesses Freeman leave to Xen.
    Freeman defeats the Nihilanth and frees the Vortigaunts. He is then placed in stasis by the G-Man.
    Black Mesa is destroyed by an atomic bomb. Shephard is also placed in stasis by the G-Man and remained so for an as of yet unknown amount of time.
    As the Black Mesa facility is destroyed, GLaDOS's race against Black Mesa ends.[23]

May 18
08:00[]

    Colette Green was to conduct a Public Relations Tour.[26] This did not happen pre-retcon due to the incident.

16:30[]

    Otis Laurey was to be instructed by the Miller's holographic instructor counterpart for a Security Guard Training, but he apparently postponed and Cross suggests to Green to ask Barney to replace him.[26] This did not happen pre-retcon due to the incident.

August 15[]

    Barney Calhoun's Blue Shift was to end on that day.[28] It ended earlier pre-retcon due to the incident.

After May 200-[]
BME newspaper clips

Newsclips of that period seen in Black Mesa East.

    During this period of almost 20 years, Gordon Freeman is in stasis.[32] It starts at the aftermath of the Black Mesa Incident in May 200- and ends at Gordon's arrival in City 17 in 202-.

    Portal Storms rage on Earth while Xen creatures continue to be teleported. The governments and United Nations provide the protection centers located in major cities worldwide.

    The Aperture Laboratories are in a lockdown, with employees still trapped inside. The number of Aperture Science employees also likely diminishes, until there are only a few of them left.

    The Combine launches an assault on Earth. Earth governments and the United Nations enter into war against them. The Seven Hour War occurs. Finally, Earth surrenders to the Combine once Wallace Breen, former Black Mesa Administrator, learns how to communicate with the Combine. Breen is subsequently appointed Earth Administrator.

200-[]

    This is the period during which Portal is set. It occurs a short amount of time after the Combine invasion of Earth.[33][34]

    In the Aperture Science computer-aided(controlled) Enrichment Center, Chell is awoken by GLaDOS who makes her perform seemingly routine tests. However Chell soon learns that the Aperture employees are long dead or have escaped, and that GLaDOS is seemingly the only being left in the decaying facility. After much promise of cake at the test's conclusion, Chell is met with an incinerator, which she narrowly escapes, and works her way through the maintenance areas, despite GLaDOS's protests. Eventually, Chell finds GLaDOS's control room, and manages to escape death by neurotoxin by detaching the GLaDOS's Personality Cores, and partially destroying her as a result. Chell is forced to the surface by GLaDOS's catastrophic explosion, only to be dragged away from freedom and back into the facility by the Party Escort Bot. Unknown to Chell however, GLaDOS ultimately survives. Due to the catastrophic error, emergency systems activate in the facility, engaging hundreds of personality constructs and maintenance bots in order to try and take care of the facility.

    Doug Rattmann, being the one of the last Aperture employees alive, witnesses GLaDOS' destruction. After the Party Escort Bot drags Chell back into the facility, Rattmann feels guilty for Chell's situation and reenters the facility to help her, redirecting all power to her stasis chamber.

200-to 201-[]

    At some point in time (Presumably before Half-Life Alyx), the Combine install the suppression field, preventing human reproduction.

Between 2015 and 2024[]

    The resistance to the Combine, spearheaded by Eli Vance and Russell as well as others begins. During a routine Reconnaissance mission, Alyx Vance is informed about a supply shipment coming into City 17 but before they are able to act on it, Eli and Alyx are captured by Civil Protection. After Alyx is broken out of custody by Russell, she sets out on a journey to save Eli. After rescuing him, Russell and Eli learn of a "superweapon" being held by the Combine in the Quarantine Zone outside of City 17. Upon severing all the cables keeping the Vault containing the superweapon afloat (with the help of several Vortigaunts), Alyx infiltrates the Vault and discovers the Elusive G-Man is the "superweapon" being held captive by the combine. When freed, the G-Man offers her a "nudge" for freeing him. After Alyx asks for the Combine off Earth, he refuses and instead offers "Something else she doesn't yet know she wants", taking Alyx into his own space and traveling forward in time.

    At an unknown time before Gordon Freeman's awakening, Isaac Kleiner and Eli Vance each build in their respective labs a teleport not needing a Xen relay with the aid of Alyx Vance and Judith Mossman, among others. (as of the release of Half-Life: Alyx, it is unknown how Alyx was still around after being taken by the G-Man.) When the teleporter is tested on a Cat, the cat is killed, traumatizing Barney Calhoun. They then continue working on it until Freeman's arrival.

Between 2019 and 2028[]

    This is the last time Alyx Vance drives Highway 17, as said by her in the radio transmission at Shorepoint Base.

202-[]
Citadel smoke trailer

The destroyed Citadel in the second Episode Two teaser.

Day 1 of Gordon's journey[]

    Two decades after the Black Mesa Incident,[32] Gordon Freeman is awakened by the G-Man after a long period of stasis, he is placed on a train entering the City 17 Trainstation.
    Barney prevents Gordon from entering a prisoner train and reintroduces both himself and Dr. Kleiner to Gordon.
    Breen's speech on instinct occurs at this time.
    Gordon explores City 17. During the exploration, he is ambushed by several Civil Protection units for entering a residential building. Gordon is saved by Alyx, who brings him to Kleiner's Lab.
    Alyx is teleported to Black Mesa East, but a teleporter accident causes Lamarr to be sent to the Wasteland and Gordon to ultimately be teleported a short distance outside the lab.
    The teleporter accident causes the Combine to send CP officers to kill Gordon.
    Gordon leaves City 17 with an airboat, and the Underground Railroad is dismantled by Civil Protection. Station 6 and 7 are destroyed by Headcrab Shells.
    Gordon attacks the APC garage and Gate 5, killing all Combine forces within. Breen's speech on Gordon Freeman occurs as Gordon raids the APC garage.
    Gordon destroys a Hunter-Chopper shortly before entering Black Mesa East.
    As Gordon enters Black Mesa East, he disembarks the airboat and meets Judith Mossman.
    Gordon is given the Gravity Gun by Alyx.
    Combine forces led by Breen raid Black Mesa East while Alyx, Dog, and Gordon are in the nearby scrapyard. Gordon escapes the raid and enters the nearby town of Ravenholm. Eli is captured and taken to Nova Prospekt. Judith Mossman is also taken however has not been captured by the Combine. Dog and Alyx also escape the raid.
    Gordon meets Grigori, Ravenholm's priest. Gordon uses Grigori's traps to explore the town.

Day 2 of Gordon's journey[]

    Grigori helps Gordon escape Ravenholm.
    After navigating an underground mine, Gordon fights several Overwatch soldiers attacking Shorepoint Base.
    Alyx tells Gordon that Eli has been captured, and that she will infiltrate Nova Prospekt by train.
    Gordon leaves Shorepoint Base with the Scout Car.
    By this time Dock 137 and Bridge Point have been occupied by the Combine. The Combine has also taken a Petroleum Station on the Coast.
    Gordon visits New Little Odessa. He helps Colonel Odessa Cubbage destroy a Combine Gunship while the Colonel contacts Lighthouse Point. After successfully destroying the gunship, Gordon continues his journey to Nova Prospekt.
    Gordon clears out the Combine presence at Dock 137, the Petroleum Station, and Bridge Point.
    Gordon reaches Lighthouse Point, where he helps the Resistance members there repel a Combine attack. Shortly after leaving on foot, Lighthouse Point is again attacked by Combine. The Scout Car is captured, and the base is presumably occupied by the Combine.
    Gordon meets with Rebels Sandy and Laszlo. When Laszlo moves in the sand, an Antlion horde attacks them, killing Laszlo.
    After traversing the Antlion territory and killing an Antlion Guard, Gordon receives Pheropods and enters the Vortigaunt Camp. After a brief tutorial on pheropod use, Gordon leaves the camp to Nova Prospekt.
    Gordon uses antlions to attack the Combine in the prison. Breen gives another speech specific to Overwatch soldiers, expressing the advisors' disappointment in their failure to stop Gordon.

Day 3 of Gordon's journey[]

    Gordon meets Alyx in the Depot. The two send Eli to the transportation room and uncover Mossman's cooperation with the Combine.
    Mossman and Eli leave Nova Prospekt to the Citadel with the Combine teleporter.
    Alyx and Gordon leave Nova Prospekt in the Combine teleporter, destroying Nova Prospekt in the process.
    After using the Nova Prospekt teleporter, it takes Gordon and Alyx a week to arrive to Kleiner's teleporter; however, from their perspective it was only a few seconds. During this week, the following events take place:
        Lamarr is recovered and returned to Dr. Kleiner.
        The original door to Kleiner's lab is replaced with a much larger door.
        Dog enters and stays inside Kleiner's lab.
        The Uprising of City 17 begins due to the destruction of Nova Prospekt. City 17 citizens are given guns and medical equipment by Resistance members outside the city.
        Headcrab shelling causes many areas of City 17 to be infested by Xenian fauna.
        The City 17 Trainstation is decommissioned and a barrier is placed in front of the entrance.

    Alyx and Gordon reappear in Kleiner's Lab and are briefed by Dr. Kleiner on current events.
    Gordon and Dog leave to find Barney.
    Breen's speech on collaboration occurs.
    Kleiner escapes City 17 with Alyx's help.
    Alyx and Gordon destroy a Combine Power Generator shortly before she is captured by the Combine.
    Gordon finds Barney and the two attack the Overwatch Nexus.
    Breen uses his Breencasts to directly speak with Gordon.
    The suppression device within the Nexus is destroyed, causing the Nexus to be occupied by resistance forces.
    Several Striders are dispatched to retake the Nexus, and attack the occupying Resistance forces.
    Gordon evades and destroys the striders surrounding the Citadel, and is given access to the Citadel itself by Dog.
    Gordon enters the Citadel and loses all his weapons except the Gravity Gun. The Gravity Gun becomes significantly more powerful, allowing Gordon to continue within the Citadel.
    Gordon is briefly captured; he, Eli and Alyx are freed by Mossman after a conversation with Breen.
    Gordon and Alyx prevent Breen from escaping by destroying the Dark Fusion Reactor, causing a massive explosion at the top of the Citadel.
    Gordon is taken into stasis by the G-Man.

Day 4 of Gordon's journey[]

    The vortigaunts remove Gordon from stasis and place him "a few days" later at the base of the Citadel.[35] During his absence the following events take place.
        The vortigaunts remove Alyx from the Citadel's Dark Fusion Reactor explosion.
        Mossman leaves for a Resistance base in the polar regions.
        Mossman reports that she has discovered the Borealis. The Combine attack her Resistance base during the report.
        Alyx searches for Gordon in City 17's rubble.
        The Combine stores Mossman's report in the Citadel.

    Alyx and Dog discover Gordon at the base of the Citadel. They are told by Eli and Kleiner that the Citadel Core is extremely unstable.
    Alyx and Gordon stabilize the Citadel Core and leave in a stalker train.
    The train is derailed, and both Gordon and Alyx are knocked unconscious.
    City 17's defenses against antlions and Xenian life fail by this time.
    Gordon and Alyx fight through an underground parking lot and escape to the surface.
    Gordon and Alyx meet Barney; Gordon and Alyx agree to create a diversion for Barney so he can move citizens to the Technical Trainstation.
    Gordon and Alyx fight through a hospital.
    Gordon, Alyx and Barney successfully get to the train station.
    Barney and the surviving citizens leave City 17 first. A Strider appears, and it is destroyed by Gordon. Gordon and Alyx leave City 17 on the last train.
    City 17 is destroyed when the Citadel explodes due to the Combine's request for reinforcements.
    The Superportal is formed. Portal Storms emit from the City 17 ruins.
    Alyx is impaled by a Hunter, who also knocks Gordon unconscious. The Victory Mine Vortigaunt stabilizes her.
    Gordon and the Victory Mine Vortigaunt meet Griggs and Sheckley in a resistance outpost. Gordon defends against an antlion assault on the outpost.
    Gordon and the Victory Mine Vortigaunt evade the Antlion Guardian and retrieve the antlion extract to heal Alyx.
    The G-man takes the opportunity (while the vortigaunts are preoccupied healing Alyx) to have a "heart to heart" with Gordon and tells Alyx to relay a message to her father.
    Alyx is healed, and the two leave Victory Mine.
    Alyx and Gordon fail to kill a Combine Advisor.
    Alyx and Gordon see Dog as they approach White Forest and race him to the entrance.
    Mossman's report is inspected at White Forest.
    White Forest is attacked by the Combine, but the attack is repelled.
    The Superportal is destroyed.
    Eli is killed by an attack from two Advisors.
    Arriving forward in time from the main events of Half-Life: Alyx, the G-Man allows Alyx to kill the Combine Advisor before it kills Eli, undoing the end of Half-Life 2: Episode 2.
    After killing the Advisor, Alyx Vance is forced into employment to replace an apparent "unwilling or unable" Gordon Freeman to do the G-Man's and his Employers' work. This removes Alyx from Gordon and Eli's vicinity, prompting Eli to swear vengeance on the G-Man, claiming him and Gordon have "work to do".

Pre-Portal 2[]

    GLaDOS' partial destruction is followed by a very VERY long period of inactivity within the Aperture Laboratories, during which time maintenance systems and Personality Cores maintain their functions. The facility remains in disarray, having become overgrown and dilapidated, with collapsed and weathered parts all over.[17] Pre-recorded 'Emergency Test Protocols' can oversee test chambers in times of cataclysmic system failure, "able to sustain themselves on a minimum 1.1 Volts". Chell spends this time in stasis until the events of Portal 2. For at least some of her stasis, Chell is under supervision by a remaining Aperture employee, Doug Rattmann.

Portal 2[]
Chell facing glados concept

Chell facing GLaDOS in the ruins of the Enrichment Center.

    About 50,000 years later....

    Chell is reawakened by Wheatley, a personality core. Wheatley insists he can secure an escape route out of the withered and dilapidated Aperture Laboratories, which instead results in the inadvertent reactivation of GLaDOS.[17] As the story progresses, GLaDOS begins repairing most of the facility as evidenced by the steadily improving conditions of the testing courses that Chell is forced to complete.
    Wheatley rescues Chell from the testing courses and helps her to GLaDOS's control room, sabotaging GLaDOS's defenses along the way.
    GLaDOS's begins the Aperture Science Cooperative Testing Initiative, which is eventually halted with the establishment of Wheatley Laboratories.
    After an extremely brief confrontation, Wheatley, with Chell's help, is placed in control of the Aperture Science facilities. He immediately becomes mad with power and proceeds to integrate GLaDOS's core with a potato battery. Lashing out, he sends Chell and GLaDOS's potato down an elevator shaft hundreds of meters deep.

    Chell survives the fall because of her Long Fall Boots and GLaDOS survives because of her happenstantial situation as a potato; she is, however, carried off by a crow at this point. Chell now finds herself traversing a series of old condemned Enrichment Spheres, the precursor to the testing rooms that GLaDOS employs in the new Aperture facilities. The first of these spheres were built at the time of Aperture Science's foundation, earlier than June 15, 1961, at which time Aperture Laboratories was under the direction of Cave Johnson. They continued to be used at least until Johnson's death by poisonous moon-rock some time in the late 1980s.

    Chell eventually finds GLaDOS, makes her way back to the facilities controlled by Wheatley, and finds that Wheatley has managed to inadvertently demolish massive portions of the facility. Signs of the extent of the facility's degeneration include the announcer which directed Chell's testing before GLaDOS's reactivation repeatedly interrupting Wheatley with warnings of the facility's imminent destruction. Eventually, Chell manages to make her way back to Wheatley's "lair" and after a relatively brief battle, exiles Wheatley and the Space Core into space via a portal shot onto the moon, and puts GLaDOS back in charge of Aperture. As a token of appreciation (or perhaps of resignation), GLaDOS allows Chell to leave Aperture Science, and sends her back to the surface, as she evidentially is growing annoyed with Chell's resilience. The game ends with the player viewing a seemingly endless field of grain, before the view is interrupted by the Companion Cube from the first Portal game being sent up after Chell. After this, She tests two robots in her Cooperative Testing Initiative, in which she and the protagonists find a vault of 10,000 cryogenically stored humans to test on. These people could've been used to rebuild humanity, but they are killed in a week by GLaDOS.

    It is unknown whether the Combine is still in control of Earth, if humans even exist anymore, or what became of GLaDOS and Chell following her escape from Aperture Laboratories.

References[]

    ↑ Marc Laidlaw Vault on the HalfLife2.net Forums
    ↑ According to the Half-Life Playstation 2 manual, he is said to be 55 in Decay, set in 200-.
    ↑ According to The Terminal, found in Half-Life: Alyx, he is said to be 52 during the Combine invasion, set in 200-.
    ↑ Aperturescience.com / Quantum Tunneling is not wormhole technology. Portal 2 and Portal 1 specifically state that the portal gun is a quantum tunneling device.
    ↑ Jump up to: 5.0 5.1 ApertureScience.com
    ↑ She is said to be 31 in Decay, set in 200-.
    ↑ Portal 2 Chapter 6 "The Fall"
    ↑ Jump up to: 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 Portal ARG
    ↑ She is said to be 25 in Decay, set in 200-.
    ↑ ApertureScience.com
    ↑ Portal
    ↑ Chell's Bring Your Daughter Work Day poster
    ↑ Portal 2, chapter The Escape
    ↑ Portal Comic Lab Rat
    ↑ ApertureScience.com and Portal Comic Lab Rat
    ↑ Portal commentary
    ↑ Jump up to: 17.0 17.1 17.2 Game Informer, April 2010 issue
    ↑ Portal 2 Demo (Part 2) - E3 2010 on IGN's YouTube channel
    ↑ Portal 2 Demo (Part 3) - E3 2010 on IGN's YouTube channel
    ↑ Portal 2: Lab Rat
    ↑ Jump up to: 21.0 21.1 Facts about the date issue on the Marc Laidlaw Vault on the HalfLife2.net Forums
    ↑ Half-Life 2: Raising the Bar
    ↑ Jump up to: 23.0 23.1 Aperture Science: A History on Game Informer
    ↑ Jump up to: 24.0 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.4 Half-Life: Opposing Force instruction manual
    ↑ Half-Life: Opposing Force
    ↑ Jump up to: 26.0 26.1 26.2 26.3 26.4 26.5 26.6 26.7 26.8 Half-Life PlayStation 2 instruction manual
    ↑ Jump up to: 27.0 27.1 27.2 27.3 27.4 27.5 Half-Life
    ↑ Jump up to: 28.0 28.1 28.2 28.3 28.4 Half-Life: Blue Shift instruction manual
    ↑ Jump up to: 29.0 29.1 29.2 Half-Life: Blue Shift
    ↑ Portal Comic Lab Rat
    ↑ Stephen Bahl as quoted on Marc Laidlaw Vault on the HalfLife2.net Forums
    ↑ Jump up to: 32.0 32.1 Episode One: The story so far on Half-Life 2's official website (Archived)
    ↑ "Valve Plans To Bridge Portal And Portal 2 With A Surprise, Keep Gordon Freeman Out Of It" on Kotaku.com
    ↑ How Valve Opened Up Portal 2 • Page 3 on Eurogamer
    ↑ The Marc Laidlaw Vault on Steam Users' Forums

See also[]

    Half-Life Wiki:Canon
    Half-Life Wiki:Retcons

Game storyline articles



Cave Johnson
Contributors to Half-Life Wiki
This article is within the scope of the Portal Project, a collaborative effort to improve articles related to Portal and Portal 2. See the project page for more details about the article status.

This article contains spoilers. Read at your own risk!

"Alright, I've been thinking. When life gives you lemons, don't make lemonade! Make life take the lemons back! Get mad! I don't want your damn lemons; what am I supposed to do with these? Demand to see life's manager! Make life rue the day it thought it could give Cave Johnson lemons! Do you know who I am? I'm the man who's gonna burn your house down... with the lemons! I'm gonna get my engineers to invent a combustible lemon that burns your house down!"
―Cave Johnson[src]

Cave Johnson is the posthumous overarching antagonist of the Portal series, but however, in Aperture Desk Job, he's the major tragic anti-villain begging to die in peace. He was the founder of the applied sciences company, Aperture Science, and was its CEO until he died as a result of "moon-rock poisoning" (likely a form of Silicosis, contracted from breathing fine mineral dusts high in silica) in the late 1980s.[2]

As one of his last requests, his right-hand and secretary Caroline became his successor.
Biography[]
Early career[]

Cave's father was a farming professor at the institute of farming although he never farmed a day in his life.[6] In his youth, Cave Johnson became a successful business entrepreneur. Having his father's theories as the backbone, in 1943 he founded Aperture Fixtures, a shower curtain developer and manufacturer. Much of Johnson's early success came from Aperture Fixtures, and with the company developing high-tech shower curtains for most branches of the United States military as well as the public,[2] Johnson soon became a billionaire. Making use of his new wealth, in 1944 Johnson purchased a huge salt mine in Upper Michigan, whose tunnels extended over four kilometers below the surface. The main Aperture Fixtures facility was constructed within the underground caverns.
Portal2 2011-04-25 22-57-59-92

Johnson's early achievements on display in the lobby of Aperture Science.

In 1947 Johnson renamed the company "Aperture Science" and began to focus on experimental physics as a new direction for the company. Although Johnson was well known for his unorthodox approach to science, Aperture Science received an award for Best New Science Company in 1947.

By the 1950s, Aperture Science was prospering. Within the Aperture Science Enrichment Center, Johnson took an active role in the company's testing of products, making voice announcements and pre-recorded messages to address Test Subjects, that consisted of specially selected astronauts, Olympian athletes, and war heroes. Johnson was aided by his assistant Caroline during this time, who remained loyal to him for decades to come. By this time, Aperture was in the process of developing the Quantum Tunneling Device, and various prototypes were utilized in the many test chambers rapidly constructed in Test Shaft 09 and beyond.[7]
Financial troubles[]

By the 1960s, Aperture's financial boom period had passed, and with countless products stuck in the testing phase, as well as many being pulled from shelves for violating health and safety regulations, Aperture was beginning to struggle. In 1961, Johnson ordered the lower areas of Test Shaft 09 to be sealed off to hide the highly unethical experiments Aperture had been conducting. In 1968, Aperture Science was involved in U.S. Senate hearings regarding astronauts going missing after their participation in testing.[7]
ASCDT cave

Cave Johnson in the 1970s.

Later in 1968, Aperture was declared bankrupt. As a result, the company could no longer afford to hire astronauts and soldiers for testing, and instead resorted to collecting homeless people from the street. These 'subjects' were offered $60 for their services, and an additional $60 if the 'subjects' would allow themselves to be disassembled and then reassembled in the name of science. Johnson was quite bitter about Aperture's bankruptcy, and did not attempt to hide his dislike for the homeless people he was forced to hire. Johnson blamed Black Mesa for Aperture's financial troubles, claiming that the rival company was stealing their ideas, but Johnson could not come up with the support he needed for these accusations and Black Mesa continued to flourish as Aperture declined.[7]

By October 1976, Johnson had Aperture branch out in its selection of "low risk" test subjects to include orphans, psychiatric patients, and the elderly.[8]
Decline of health and death[]

By the 1980s, Aperture remained in financial turmoil. Desperate for a successful new product, in 1981 Johnson purchased approximately seventy million dollars-worth of Moon rocks for use in further mobility gel development, despite not having nearly enough money to cover the costs (he was told he could barely afford to buy $7 worth of moon rocks, let alone $70 million). Upon discovering that moon dust serves as a portal conductor, Johnson took an active role in its implementation into Conversion Gel. However, during the development of the Conversion Gel, Johnson contracted a severe illness as a result of his prolonged exposure to the moon dust, which slowly but severely damaged his lungs and caused both of his kidneys to fail.[9]
Portal2 2011-06-22 18-31-36-29

A mandatory employee testing area in the 1980s, with a portrait of an older, severely ill Cave Johnson on the wall.

In response to Aperture's continued struggle for test subjects amidst financial turmoil, Johnson made testing mandatory for all employees. He stated that this dramatically raised the quality of test subjects, but dramatically reduced employee retention. As such, he finally moved to phase out human testing.[9]

During this time, Johnson continued to make pre-recorded messages over the intercom system, however few were on the subject of testing, and instead addressed employees about the future of the company, with also many having Johnson raging over his imminent demise. Desperate to cheat death, in 1982 Johnson ordered his engineers and technicians to begin research and development on a computer system (AI) that could store his consciousness. Should the system be completed after his death, Johnson ordered that his ever loyal assistant Caroline succeed him as CEO of Aperture.[10] Johnson died before the system was finished, and eventually Caroline was uploaded into the system and transformed into GLaDOS.[11][12]
Appearances[]
Overlay scrawlings006a

Graffiti and pasted photos left by Rattmann featuring Cave Johnson's username and password.
Portal[]

In Portal, Johnson is only referred to once in the game, in a graffiti by Doug Rattmann found in Test Chamber 12, simply as "cjohnson" (followed by "tier3") scribbled on a wall, which appeared to be an administrator login and password for ApertureScience.com. Above can be found three portraits of men in suits with their heads masked by a Weighted Companion Cube. The bottom-left one has the words "Our Founder" under it and the letters "R.I.P." right beside; this is a portrait of Cave Johnson.
Portal 2[]

In one of the memos revealed during the Portal ARG, Johnson's recording says that he is dead now, and that he is able to write memos from the Black Mesa Facility.

In Portal 2, Johnson appears to be deceased, with only his automated pre-recorded voice messages playing to guide Chell through the disused lower levels of the facility. The initial messages are intended for "astronauts, war heroes, and Olympians", indicating a time of prosperity for the company where the greatest members of society were used during testing. The messages show a steady decline in Johnson's sanity, and consequently the prosperity of his company. His 1970s era recordings state that Aperture was a major participant in the 1968 Senate hearings relating to some matter involving missing astronauts, and that Aperture has gone bankrupt. Johnson blames Aperture's bankruptcy on Black Mesa, claiming that they have stolen ideas that Aperture has invented. Aperture's economic troubles also show in announcements directed at test subjects, as the subjects are normally hobos who were picked off the street and offered up to $120 for testing ($60 for testing, $60 more if they allowed Aperture to disassemble and then reassemble them). In the 1980s recordings, Cave states that employees are required to test.

At one point, he states he had contracted a severe illness from contact with ground Moon rocks (the primary component of Conversion Gel). He also made it mandatory for all employees to undergo testing in the chambers. He ordered that technology be developed to allow him to be put into a computer, but it's apparent the tech wasn't finished before he died. He also ordered that, should this occur, Caroline was to be put in charge of Aperture, forcibly if necessary. This lead to the creation of GLaDOS, the antagonist of Portal, which led to GLaDOS's confusion of who Caroline was.

In the Portal 2 DLC, Perpetual Testing Initiative, Cave Johnson makes a number of appearances over the intercom at the start of each test. In the DLC Cave is from another Earth in the Multiverse, Earth Prime. Caroline is not present on Earth Prime (or apparently any alternate Earth) and Cave instead has an assistant named Greg, who was responsible for the Multiverse theory. There are also multiple versions of Cave from different Earths, one of which was successfully transferred to a computer before his demise, although after hearing from this "Cave of pure intellect", Cave Prime decides to cancel the GLaDOS development program on Earth Prime. There is no known number of how many Alternate Caves there are in the Multiverse, but we do know that there is one Cave Prime, and one Dark Cave, who tries to take the place of Cave Prime, so he can take the Moneyverse, a universe made entirely of money. This was suggested by Greg, and was only a theory, and at the end of the DLC Dark Cave's test subject finds two Moneyverse's and Cave Prime and Dark Cave take one each. The DLC ends with you being brought back to Earth Prime thanks to Greg, and the testing continues.
Aperture Desk Job[]

In an alternate universe, Aperture scientists were able to create a robot body for Johnson before his passing. However, the body's head was too small to fit his brain, so they kept building it bigger and bigger until he became a giant head with the robot body crushed underneath. Johnson proceeded to kill some of the scientists and threatened to kill the rest if they came back before locking himself in his office at the top of Aperture Science. In the events of the game, Grady and the player arrange a meeting (break into his office) to show off their new invention (a toilet turret) and discover the giant head, who asks that they kill him to end his suffering. They oblige, first by using the turret to try to destroy it, before finally shutting off its power source. Unfortunately, the facility's backup power turns him back on immediately, prompting him to fire Grady and the player. Before this can be made official, however, the damage to the room causes Johnson's head to crash through the floor, plummeting to the bottom of the facility. Now stuck with the discarded remains of several toilet turrets, Johnson sings a short operatic requiem with them.
Personality and skills[]

Cave Johnson was an eccentric but highly motivated man. He is said to have learned to "trust his gut," and to think in terms of "the big picture" without regard for details. He apparently had a poor personal understanding of science, but he understood people. He was very dismissive whenever someone tried to tell him something that objected to his views, often ignoring it and firing the person on the spot for it.

Johnson was extroverted, enthusiastic, and opinionated. He seems to have been very energetic, perhaps even impulsive, and considered his life an adventure he was happy to be on. He was born a salesman, a leader. People trusted him, even when his plans were clearly dangerous. He used his warm, homespun delivery to put people at ease. However, he appeared to be spoiled and refused to oblige to others' instructions. He was not particularly ethical, and he did not seem to accept the responsibility that came with his power: Many of his company's initiatives were dangerous and ill-conceived, but he was evidently unconcerned or oblivious to their ramifications.[13]

The results of the Aperture Science Collaborative Disposition Test tell that Johnson does not see crises - only challenging opportunities ("challengitunities") he chooses to scale like mountains, that he is a can-do, shoot-from-the-hip, silver-tongued self-starter, and a good match for any cooperative test partner, providing they shut up and listen.
Behind the scenes[]
ApertureScience.com screen10

An excerpt of Aperture Science and Johnson's history revealed through the NOTES command on ApertureScience.com.

    By signing into ApertureScience.com with the username "CJOHNSON" and the password "TIER3" (referring to the three tiered program), one could enter Cave Johnson's account. These login and password can be found in Rattmann scribblings spread around the Enrichment Center's maintenance area seen during Portal, with the words "trust me" right to it. After logging in as Cave Johnson, "GLaDOS v1.07a (c) 1982 Aperture Science, Inc." appeared. Then one could type either APPLY to start the Enrichment Center Test Subject Application Process, or NOTES, which gave information about Aperture Science and Johnson's history, in the form of a short timeline.[2] When Valve retconned Aperture and Cave's story, they took the command line offline.
    The "Our Founder" portrait mentioned above is based on a painted portrait of Sam Rayburn.
    Portal casting

    The casting sheet.
    A casting call conducted by Shana Landsburg for Portal 2 was posted on the subscribers-only industry website Breakdown Express on June 8, 2008, with a concept art portrait of Cave Johnson. That call sheet, seeking a voice-over artist to take on the role of Johnson, an "eccentric dead billionaire", with work tentatively to start at the end of July 2008, was the first hint that Johnson would appear in Portal 2. The call sheet revealed many bits of Johnson's fate and personality, that he speaks with a slight Southern/Western accent ("natural, not too broad"), and how his role evolves as the game progresses.[13]
    Cave Johnson's appearance in the portrait given with the June 2008 casting call was drastically changed for the Aperture Science Collaborative Disposition Test in April 2011 to a slightly younger appearance, showing a Johnson with sideburns and brighter hair; the shirt and tie were also replaced by a turtleneck sweater.
    09394469.756

    The three pillars memo.
    In the file dump retrieved at the BBS number (425) 822-5251 revealed during the Portal ARG, several memos seemingly written by Cave Johnson can be found. In one, he describes the three pillars on which Aperture Science is built. In another, he addresses Test Subjects who raised their concerns about the dangers of the research conducted by Aperture Science. Another consists of a rant about casualty rates, firing employees, and him practicing beekeeping in his office. In another, reusing text from the casting call sheet revealed in 2008, he apparently announces his death, and being able to write memos from beyond the grave. One is apparently the answer to a confidential letter Johnson sent, titled "Human Enrichment & Testing Initiative, Resource Acquisitions". It apparently describes the four types of Test Subjects and their behavior, referring to them in a less than human way.[8]
    An e-mail from Johnson can be seen on the Apple games page for Portal, informing members of the executive team of some information that should not be revealed to any Test Subjects, as it would "impair the scientific value of what we're doing here at Aperture Science."[14] The information is revealed below the e-mail, and it consists of common console commands. In the e-mail, Johnson states that he is "busy cheating death".
    Cave Johnson narrated the four weekly videos that lead up to Portal 2's release: Panels, Bot Trust, Turrets, and Boots, presented as informational videos intended for customers of Aperture products.
    On ApertureScience.com, "1978" and "1979" were originally given as the date for Johnson's mercury poisoning and kidney failure, respectively. These dates were later retconned to 1974 and 1976, as seen in the updated Aperture Science timeline on Game Informer. This was later replaced by the story as featured in Portal 2.
    " Johnson" is quite similar to "Johanson", the name of the original Borealis captain. Furthermore, "Arbeit Laboratories" can be seen on some crates inside the ship.[15] The retail Borealis belonging to Aperture Science, it is possible those names were recycled.
    Diorama card001

    The cardboard figure.
    A case of the diorama exhibit sequence cut from Portal 2 was to contain a cardboard figure of Cave Johnson posing with a bearded hobo, someone in a straitjacket (identical to the Screamer cut from Left 4 Dead), and a little girl with the Aperture logo on her dress, with a blue Aperture logo behind.[16] The texture for the cardboard figure is present in the Portal 2 files, under the name "diorama_card001.vtf".
    The people with Cave Johnson on the cardboard diorama could be the earlier test subjects which included child orphans, the homeless and the psychiatry patients.
    A scene cut from Portal 2 would have seen Chell and PotatOS encountering a Weighted Storage Cube containing Johnson's consciousness. Having been alive for centuries by this point, the cube begs them to kill him, which they oblige.[17] The subtitles for this scene are still in the Portal 2 Source files, suggesting it may have been recorded, though the actual voice recordings have never emerged. The overall concept, and even some lines originally written for this scene, were reused in Aperture Desk Job.

Trivia[]

    Cave Johnson's physical appearance is based on that of Portal 2 lead animator, Bill Fletcher.[18]
    Cave Johnson narrates the "Extras" videos in Portal 2, which could mean that he survived; this is unlikely, however.
    According to a voice line in Lego Dimensions, Cave Johnson likes three-cheese burritos and coleslaw.
    Cave Johnson is referenced in Poker Night 2 in a conversation between Brock Samson and GLaDOS. Brock asks about Johnson, though GLaDOS says she cannot find his name in her data banks. According to Samson, Johnson was good friends with Dr. Venture and used to hang around with the original Team Venture until he disappeared in the 80s. GLaDOS states that she has "a Cave Johnson-shaped hole" in her database, as all instances of Cave Johnson have been redacted. This makes her sad.
        This conversation can only be viewed if the full Portal skin (Portal-themed cards, chips, and table felt) is used.

Test courses and achievements[]

    Test Shaft 09 (Subjects: Paid subjects, Staff, Chell)
    Co-op Test Shaft (Subjects: Paid subjects, Staff, ATLAS and P-body)

[show]Achievement List
Gallery[]

The dangers memo.

The dangers memo.

The casualty rates memo.

The casualty rates memo.

The death memo.

The death memo.
The confidential letter.

The confidential letter.
Leaked casting call portrait. Based on a photograph of Ross Perot.
1950s portrait of Cave Johnson, reminiscent of a portrait of Walt Disney.
1970s portrait of Cave Johnson.

1970s portrait of Cave Johnson.
1970s portrait of Cave Johnson, with Caroline at his side.

1970s portrait of Cave Johnson, with Caroline at his side.
1980s portrait of Cave Johnson.

1980s portrait of Cave Johnson.
List of appearances[]

    ApertureScience.com (First appearance) (Mentioned only)
    Portal (As "CJOHNSON" scribbled on a wall)
    Portal: Still Alive (As "CJOHNSON" scribbled on a wall) (Non-canonical appearance)
    Portal ARG
    PotatoFoolsDay ARG
    Portal 2: Lab Rat (Prerecorded message only)
    Portal 2 (Prerecorded messages only)
    Perpetual Testing Initiative (Recorded messages only)
    The Final Hours of Portal 2
    Aperture Desk Job (Non-canonical appearance)

References[]

    ↑ Portal 2 PeTI DLC
    ↑ Jump up to: 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 ApertureScience.com
    ↑ Aperture Science: A History on Game Informer
    ↑ "PAX: Portal 2 Nabs J.K. Simmons" on IGN.com
    ↑ Five things you didn't know about Portal 2 at Game Hunters
    ↑ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b7rZO2ACP3A
    ↑ Jump up to: 7.0 7.1 7.2 Portal 2 chapter The Fall
    ↑ Jump up to: 8.0 8.1 Portal ARG
    ↑ Jump up to: 9.0 9.1 Portal 2 chapter The Reunion
    ↑ Cave Johnson Voice Recording
    ↑ Portal 2 chapter The Part Where He Kills You
    ↑ Talking with Caboos15: Ellen McLain plus surprise guest on YouTube
    ↑ Jump up to: 13.0 13.1 Rumor: Portal 2 Casting Begins, Sample Script Page Leaked! on Kombo.com
    ↑ Portal at Apple Games
    ↑ Playable Half-Life 2 Beta files
    ↑ The Final Hours of Portal 2
    ↑ "How Cave Johnson's talking head got cut from Portal 2." Engadget.
    ↑ A small portrait of Bill Fletcher, as found on this page.

Characters
Aperture Science


Portal 2
Contributors to Half-Life Wiki
12–16 minutes
	This article is within the scope of the Portal Project, a collaborative effort to improve articles related to Portal and Portal 2. See the project page for more details about the article status.

    "Start thinking with portals."
    —Tagline[src]

Portal 2 is a first-person puzzle video game developed and published by Valve Corporation. It was released on April 19, 2011, for PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. Portal 2 is a sequel to Portal as well as the first game created by Valve to be rated E10+, compared to the M rating of all of their previous titles excluding the first Portal game and the original Day of Defeat, which were rated T.
Synopsis[]

First hinted in the update made to Portal in March 2010 as part of the Portal ARG, it was announced on March 5, 2010 to be released in fall 2010,[5] but was later announced on June 9, 2010, as delayed until an unspecified date in 2011,[6] until it was said to be released on February 9, 2011.[7] This date was again delayed to April 19.[8]

Portal 2 was previewed in the twelve-page cover story of the April 2010 issue of Game Informer, revealing some plot details and new gameplay features.[9] It was also confirmed that GLaDOS was indeed still alive, and would return as the main antagonist.[10] In addition, Game Informer and other sources confirmed a co-op mode for up to two players with its own separate campaign.[10] The co-op campaign was said to have separate credits and would take place after the single-player story.[11][12] Valve was also scheduled to unveil the Portal 2 World Premiere on June 14, at their E3 2010 press conference,[13] but later canceled the showing of Portal 2 on the 14th through a humorous e-mail, to be replaced with a "surprise". The game was shown in the form of a demo at Valve's own booth instead,[14] and on June 15, the first Portal 2 trailer was shown during the Sony press conference, with the "surprise" apparently being its release on the PlayStation 3 console, which was originally not the case.
Storyline[]

Characters[]

    Chell (The protagonist for single-player)
    ATLAS and P-body (The protagonists for co-op)
    GLaDOS
    Wheatley (Intelligence Dampening Sphere)
    Cave Johnson (Portraits and voice only)
    Caroline (Hidden portrait and voice only)
    Doug Rattmann (Scribblings only)
    Space Core
    Adventure Core ("Rick")
    Factual Core

Enemies[]

    GLaDOS (First half of single-player)
    Aperture Science Sentry Turret
    Wheatley (Second half of single-player)

Gameplay[]

The gameplay of Portal 2 is based on its predecessor Portal, where the player, with the use of portals, solves puzzles. New gameplay elements such as Mobility Gels, the Aerial Faith Plate and the Thermal Discouragement Beam were implemented as means for the player to master in order to solve puzzles.

Chell no longer wears the Advanced Knee Replacement, but instead suited in the new Aperture Science Long Fall Boots. Combat plays a slightly larger role than in the last game, seeing as Chell is always meeting with enemies along the way.
Co-op campaign[]

Cooperative play is a new game mode introduced to Portal 2. The campaign features two characters, ATLAS and P-body. The two players must work together to pass tests and areas outside the test chambers. The developers implemented robotic characters in order to ease explanation of a respawning system, giving the story explanation that humans could not be trusted.

The gameplay is very similar to single-player mode, with the addition of object-specific buttons and tools to aid in cooperative play, as well as 8 gestures.

The Co-op campaign also contains whiteboards with writings found in images from The Potato Sack that are found in final test chambers and that are out of the testing track.
Development[]

As mentioned in The Final Hours of Portal 2, Portal 2 stemmed from F-STOP, which originally was a prequel to the first game set during Cave Johnson's era. F-STOP was not to feature portals; what remains of it in the final game is the Enrichment Shafts.

In 2007, Kim Swift stated that future Portal developments would depend on the community's reactions, saying, "We're still playing it by ear at this point, figuring out if we want to do multiplayer next, or Portal 2, or release map packs."[15][16] On January 31, 2008, Lombardi confirmed that "more Portal" would be forthcoming, and promised that the additional content would not just be "more puzzles";[17] an interview with Kim Swift on February 21, 2008, revealed that a full sequel, Portal 2, would be coming.[18] Swift also stated that the team creating the Portal sequel were deciding upon the design they should implement and that a multiplayer Portal "from a technology standpoint is possible",[19] though Swift had previously stated they tried a Portal multiplayer deathmatch variant, but admitted that "it's less fun than you'd think."[20]

On June 10, 2008, Kotaku reported that Valve was seeking voice actors for the character role of Aperture Science CEO Cave Johnson and suggested that the second game may be a prequel to the Portal events.[21] However, it was later suggested on Kombo.com it could be a sequel, with Johnson as another AI.[22]

On April 8, 2011, lead writer Chet Faliszek gave an interview to Beefyjack where he discusses a variety of topics, including allusions to how Portal 2's story will fit into the overall Half-Life universe and the secret to Valve's success when it comes to producing games being lots of playtesting.[23]

On April 13, 2011, Doug Lombardi, Valve's VP of Marketing, posted details of Portal 2's PS3 Steam integration on the official US PlayStation Blog. He noted that it will "offer cross-platform matchmaking, gameplay, friends, chat, and achievements" and will also allow players to save their progress, in both the co-op and single-player mode, to the Steam Cloud, which means gamers can continue any saved game on the PS3. Achievements will sync up as well. All in all, these features will, according to Lombardi, make the PS3 version of Portal 2 "the best console version of the game."[24]
Soundtrack[]

Achievements and trophies[]

Portal 2 has 51 PC achievements,[25] 50 Xbox 360 achievements[26] with a total of 1000 Gamerscore points, and 51 trophies;[27] 42 bronze trophies, 5 silver trophies, 3 gold trophies and 1 platinum trophy.
Reception[]

Portal 2 has received universal critical acclaim and currently holds a 95/100 on Metacritic. Critics praised nearly every aspect of it, particularly its use of humor. Many also find the game's difficulty at just the right level, saying it's not so hard that it's frustrating, and yet hard enough that you get a sense of success after completing a level. Metacritic ranked Portal 2 as one of the best video games of the 2010s,[28] and Video Game Canon ranks Portal 2 as one of the best games of all time.[29]
Bonus[]

Portal 2 features an interactive teaser for the at the time upcoming film Super 8 directed by J. J. Abrams and produced by Steven Spielberg and released in 2011. In the teaser, the player starts in a train that soon derails (after about a minute). Following the accident, the player walks through the aftermath of the crash until arriving at a boxcar with an armored door. Something smashes the door open, then the teaser cuts to black, and is followed by the roar of an escaped creature, until the Super 8 title is shown, ending the teaser.

Under the boxcar with the armored door, you can see the link to the Super 8 Website.
Downloadable content[]
Sixense DLC[]

A level pack was made available for those that purchased the Razer Hydra motion controller. It consists of six normal chambers and seven advanced chambers. With the DLC installed, the portal gun gains several new abilities. The new features work in both the extra levels and the main campaign but are disabled in the co-op campaign. This pack was later released for the PlayStation 3's Move controllers, under the name "Portal 2: In Motion".

The first new ability is One to One, which allows the player to rotate a held object in three dimensions, as well as hold it further away through the use of an energy beam. The beam does not have infinite range, only allowing the object to be held about three or four panel-lengths away. This allows for precision aiming with the Weighted Pivot Cube and can be used to place cubes on buttons that would otherwise be out of reach.

The second ability is portal surfing. This ability allows the player to move their portals after placing them. Unlike One to One, this works at any distance. Portals can be tilted to either side and moved along walls, so long as the surface in question can support a portal. This is a necessary aspect of several tests, which have portal surfaces too short for a portal to form on vertically, necessitating that it be dragged there horizontally. Dragging portals also allows the player to move themselves or objects across a room while suspended in an Excursion Funnel. Tilting a portal connected to a Hard Light Bridge allows the bridge to be turned on its side as a shield if necessary, or moved along with the player to block a turret. The spreading of Mobility Gels can also be controlled with much greater ease.

The final ability is scaling, which allows the portal gun to alter the dimensions of a special Scaling Cube. The cube can be shrunk to fit through a tight space, stretched out and flattened to serve as a bridge or even enlarged to cover multiple buttons at once. In addition, the scaling cube's mass increases or decreases in proportion to its size. This allows a sufficiently enlarged cube to smash through panes of glass an ordinary cube could not, as well as crush turrets or the player if it lands on them.
Portal 2: Peer Review[]

Portal 2: Peer Review was developed for Portal 2 and was released on October 4, 2011. The DLC was launched across all platforms (Steam, Xbox Live, PSN) free of charge. It continues the story of ATLAS and P-Body as they assist GLaDOS in finding a mysterious intruder in the facility, and adds a challenge mode for both singleplayer and co-op maps, allowing a player to race certain maps, trying to place the least amount of portals in the shortest amount of time, as well as compare their scores with other users.[30]
The Perpetual Testing Initiative[]

The Perpetual Testing Initiative is a level editing and sharing service for the PC and Mac versions of Portal 2, released by Valve on May 8th, 2012. It is free for all who purchased Portal 2 and is included directly in the game. Users can create levels, and play them, and also share them online for other players to play. The level editor features a simple interface, and the ability to test play the level. The storyline, while simple, involves Cave Johnson, the test subjects of Aperture Science, and multiple universes.
Gallery[]
[]
Loading screens[]
References[]

The Half-Life Wiki has more images related to Portal 2.

    ↑ Eurogamer - "Portal 2 due out this Christmas"
    ↑ Portal 2 at E3 on YouTube
    ↑ [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wMQASUA_1Do Portal: Companion Collection - Announcement Trailer
    ↑ Game Informer, April 2010 issue
    ↑ Portal 2 Announced - March 5, 2010 - on Steampowered.com
    ↑ Portal 2 Delayed to 2011 on IGN
    ↑ Gamescom: Portal 2 release date confirmed on ComputerAndVideoGames.com
    ↑ Portal 2 spawning on April 21 in Australia
    ↑ Game Informer April Preview
    ↑ Jump up to: 10.0 10.1 Gamestop Portal 2 page
    ↑ Portal 2 will have two end credit sequences
    ↑ Portal 2 - Chet Faliszek Q&A Feature
    ↑ E3 2010 – Video Game Convention – Gaming News, Previews, Press Conferences, Trailers, Demos
    ↑ Valve Replaces Pre-E3 Portal 2 Reveal With "Surprise"
    ↑ Bramwell, Tom (2007-05-15). Portal: First Impressions. Eurogamer. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
    ↑ Francis, Tom (2007-05-09). PC Preview: Portal - PC Gamer Magazine. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
    ↑ Purchese, Rob (2008-01-31). More Portal for sure. Eurogamer. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
    ↑ Brandon, Nick (2008-02-21). Portal 2 Confirmed by Valve. Shacknews. Retrieved on 2008-02-21.
    ↑ Multiplayer Portal possible. Gametrailers TV. Retrieved on 2008-03-02.
    ↑ Faylor, Chris (2008-02-23). GDC 08: Portal Creators on Writing, Multiplayer, Government Interrogation Techniques. Shacknews. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
    ↑ Plunkett, Luke (2008-06-10). Casting call reveals Portal 2 details. Kotaku. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
    ↑ Levin, Phillip (2008-06-10). Rumor: Portal 2 Casting Begins, Sample Script Page Leaked!. Kombo.com. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
    ↑ Pickard, James (2011-04-08). Interview with Valve's Chet Faliszek. Beefyjack. Retrieved on 2011-04-08.
    ↑ Lombardi, Doug (2011-04-13). Valve Reveals Portal 2 for PlayStation 3: Steam Details. Official US PlayStation Blog. Retrieved on 2011-04-13.
    ↑ http://steamcommunity.com/stats/Portal2/achievements/
    ↑ http://www.xbox360achievements.org/game/portal-2/achievements/
    ↑ http://www.ps3trophies.org/game/portal-2/trophies/
    ↑ Part 2: Best-of-the-decade top ten lists. Metacritic. Retrieved on 2021 June 24.
    ↑ Video Game Canon. Retrieved on 2021 June 24.
    ↑ [1] on Videogamer.com

External links[]
Software
Real-World subjects
